Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined for a second time by Doctor
Vlastasikimi. She is assistant professor at the Andover University
of Technology. I'm leaving a link to our first
interview. In the description of this one, and today
we're talking mostly about cognitive diversity in science and
its importance and also a little bit about the
philosophy and ethics of AI. Solaster, welcome back to
the show. It's always a pleasure to talk with
you.
Thank you so much for the invitation, and I'm
very happy to be here again.
OK, so let's start with the topic of cognitive
diversity.
So,
to start off with, what is cognitive diversity?
Cognitive diversity is used in epistemology, um uh to
understand uh different ways of reasoning, um, and it
can also be used from the perspective of psychology,
whether someone has different types of biases, different type
of ways of processing information. What is of interest
for us is to also understand epistemic diversity. And
I must admit immediately that uh I even consulted
with some of my colleagues in preparation for this
interview, and we realized that we are using, um
not uh clearly, um, these two terms, but often
interchangeably, which might not be the case, it's something
to think about. The point there is that when
we have, we can have social diversity, which I
think it's intuitive for everyone, that people come from
different backgrounds, um, and that they have different social,
uh, experiences, but what we, uh, sometimes neglect is
the aspect or a cognitive aspect. And that's the
way how someone is processing information, the background, um,
uh, knowledge that one has. Uh, ALSO, when we
talk about epistemic diversity, these are even some positions
that we might take in philosophy of science. Or
in general, uh, so the way, how do we
learn, the way how do we observe the world,
some background assumptions that we are having from which
we are building further hypothesis. And that becomes really
relevant, not only in philosophy of science, but also
in epistemology in general, uh, because, um, the, the
premises that, and, and, and there is, uh, um,
good evidence for it, that when we have the
diversity of thought. Uh, THIS will help on the
group level to gather a more appropriate knowledge. And
I guess then we will dive into the conditions
that need to be satisfied for that.
Yeah. But, but, but I mean, just to try
to make this a little bit more clear, um,
are we, when it comes to cognitive diversity here,
are we talking about specific ways that people, uh,
specific ways that people, uh, diverge in terms of
their ways of processing. Information psychologically. I mean, I
was thinking, for example, this is just an example
of the work done by cultural psychologists and people
like Richard Nisbett when they talk, for example, about
analytic versus holistic thinking and, and he compares, for
example, Western people to East Asian people in their
thinking. I mean, are those the kinds of Things
we are talking about or what exactly. I mean,
when it comes to uh cognitive processing or cognitive
mechanisms, or are we not talking about specific ways
of processing information or just, uh, in a more
general way, people just coming from different, I don't
know, cultural backgrounds, social backgrounds, and things like that?
Uh, THANK you. This was an excellent example that
you used, and indeed, that would be an example
of cognitive diversity. Uh, THE, the different social background
will not necessarily make someone cognitively diverse. There is
a high chance. That this will be the case,
or let's say, epistemically diverse. But if we are
in the, um, if we went to the same
school, if we were exposed to the similar content,
if we belong to the same ways of thinking,
like what you just said, like in the Western
way of thinking, then it's likely that our cognitive
diversity or epistemic diversity or, again, these two terms
are not identical, um, uh, will, uh, be different.
And um there is also, um, so, so when
we think about the epistemic diversity, can also be
about which type of methods in science I want
to use, right? Whether I'm a qualitative psychologist, or
whether I'm a quantitative psychologist, or whether I like
the mixed methodology, and, uh, whether I, um, uh,
what I'm experienced in. So now imagine a team
of experimental psychologists hiring someone, uh, doing quantitative research,
hiring someone from the qualitative side. And this person
can really be beneficial for the team because it
can add certain depth to their type of research.
But we have to ask then this researcher to
help, uh, with, for instance, implementing some mixed methods,
adding some additional layers, doing, uh, qualitative analysis in.
And if you just say to this person, OK,
now you need to learn all the methods, or,
I mean, they presumably they know it, but because
they study it and just apply them the way
how we are applying, then this diversity will be
lost because there, the, the, one of the ideas
there is that we want to get knowledge. Uh,
ANOTHER thing there, um, diversity makes a lot of
sense in the epistemic context is when we think
about the context of epistemic justice or injustice. And
by the fact that someone is a woman, for
instance, means that this person has specific experiences. WHICH
uh only this person can explain. Um, AND, and,
and we know this from the literature on intellectual,
um, uh, uh, justice and injustice. And that there
was like a huge paradigm that women cannot do
difficult work or, uh, physically difficult work or, or
that they cannot do, uh, intellectually the same as
men. And but then you kind of get some
other counterexamples and experiences, and that enters. Then the
general discourse, but you need a testimony from someone
belonging to, to that specific group to explain, OK,
uh, this is actually happening here and it's not
being recognized. So it has, it's a multifaceted. Point.
Um, THEN we talk about the cognitive diversity. Indeed,
there can also be the, the thinking styles, um,
different cognitive, um, uh, I mean, potentially even some
types of neurodiversity and so on, but in this
epistemic domain, we can really observe, um, also this
other type of phenomena. Right? So, so, just our,
uh, our background, our positionality, and that's why it's
very helpful in the research papers to always specify
what is our positionality. And that helps the reader
to understand where we come from. And if we
are working, right, so I'm saying, I am a
woman, I come from East Europe, and I can,
uh, write from this perspective. I could maybe be
sensitive to gender issues. I, I, I, I am
sensitive to, um, this east-west division, but of course,
it's not that I can now testify, uh, for
people who belong to other communities and who have
the different. Um, uh, uh, OBSERVATION of the world
and different style of thinking about the world. If
I would be exposed to that type of culture
or, or if I was studying in such an
environment or working, that would for sure, um, change
the situation. But also having colleagues. Um, uh, COMING
from different backgrounds, uh, willing to test different hypotheses,
um, having different perspectives is very helpful if you
are listening and if you are ready to learn
from them because there is no one. Uh, A
right way, uh, to do science, but also in
general, to communicate with people. Because these questions in
epistemology, they are related to the questions of the
trust in science, but they are also related to
the questions of how we are learning from each
other and how much we understand each other. And
the more we understand each other and the more
we're open to different types of thinking and understand
the different experiences leads to different, um, uh, behavior.
Um, THAT, that, um, expands our horizons and it's
very helpful. So it leads to some type of,
um, uh, wisdom of the crowds, potentially, instead of,
on the other hand, polarization that we say, OK,
you don't think the same as we do. Thus,
your viewpoint is not legitimate. And, and, and, and
that would be an example of an exclusion of
someone based on, on, on the opinions.
So when it comes to epistemic diversity specifically, I
was wondering, does that include people being diverse in
terms of, for example, the different ways they approach
science. Um, I mean, let me just give perhaps
two different kinds of examples. I'm not sure if
in philosophy, uh, nowadays, you still use these terms
or if people still identify as such. But let's
say, for example, someone might Have a more, uh,
idealist approach and another might have a more empiricist
approach, or someone might be perhaps still on the
camp of positivist, more positivist like, something like that.
Or even, for example, uh, another example would be
someone, uh, might come from a perspective of, of
a substance ontology and another person from a perspective
of, uh, process ontology. I mean, are those, let
Let's say, uh, I, I'm not sure if I
should call this theoretical diversity because basically our people
come, it's people coming uh to the, or bringing
to the table different uh theoretical approaches and perspectives,
but, uh, does the, uh, do these kinds of
things, uh, apply in the context of epistemic diversity?
Do you also consider these differences in terms of
kinds of thinking or not?
Definitely, definitely these examples and thank you for them,
Ricardo. Um, uh, THIS is how we, um, Uh,
uh, how, how we, uh, think of, uh, epistemic
diversity in philosophy and already, um, also what you
explained before coming from, um, A lot of philosophy
that's being taught in Western Europe has this history
of philosophy coming from Western Europe. So we can
get this classical education that starts from uh a
pre-Socratic period and goes over um uh rationalism, uh,
um, or can't, um, I mean, like the, the,
the Western thinkers. And, of course, that, that we,
a lot of us don't get enough exposure, um,
to different type of, uh, philosophy, and that will
form some background assumptions that we are having. And,
of course, if someone, but that is completely, uh,
Sofite was also saying this, right? The, the type
of person you are, the type of philosophy you're
choosing, and that is completely legitimate. So, for me,
formal approaches to philosophy were resonating, but that doesn't
mean that this is the only uh approach which
is valid and to which we should pay attention.
On the contrary, I find it very nice um
to receive different perspectives and to then also. DEEPER
in my research, but it's also legitimate that we
have the division of people working on different subcategories
of research, um, as long as, uh, uh, eventually,
we can aggregate that knowledge, which happens over the
longer periods of time, and make, um, some recommendations.
And, um, I think it's very enriching and very
interesting to, um, have the positive view on diversity
and because in the nowadays, Um, they are facing
this that there is this pressure that people have
to really think in one way, or that, um,
uh, it even gets connected with the social belonging.
They they hope you're thinking on some values that
we have, but even if we have different background
values that can help us, uh, to be cognitively
diverse as a team. And again, as long as,
so, so there is one premise that we have
to have some intellectual tolerance towards each other, as
long as we have the intellectual tolerance towards each
other and openness towards each other, that can be
really beneficial. Uh, THE other, um, aspect that I,
I wanted to point out is that even kind
of mistakes in reasoning and science, uh, often, um,
fell often. I mean, can, can be fruitful. And
also someone who is like, it's not. Immediately clear
what, what is the rational thing, but people can
just follow their passion, can maybe even have some
biases. If we spent a lot of time exploring
one hypothesis. The hypothesis is not working. We have
the suno bias and we want to work further
on it. So rational thing would be to drop
it, and that's something that I wrote about. But
from the perspective of a bigger team, it does
make sense that people even who have biases are
there. Uh, AND, and who not only that, we
all have biases, but I mean, the people who
follow their biases in research are there because sometimes
that leads to, um, a breakthrough. Uh, AND, uh,
the, the more, um, so one simple explanation is,
think of the epistemic lens, uh, epistemic space. So,
we are trying to see, to learn something, and
we have an epistemic space. We are exploring epistemic
space, we are exploring it together. And, um, if
we're all only in one point A or in
around this point of the epistemic space, then all
other parts of it get neglected. So it is
good. That people are exploring other parts of it
and that we try to encourage them to do
it, uh, that we have the um understanding for
it. So I guess nowadays, because again of the
politically heated debate about the diversity and inclusion in,
in the US academia, uh, we are now, um,
making a case for why, um, why it matters.
And not only, uh, uh, I mean, it, it,
it really matters also for the people, not only
from the group perspective, but even from the individual
perspective and someone challenges our viewpoints and shows us,
look, we can think in a radically different way
that can also help us, uh, to think better.
And, and open our horizons, or only just challenge
us to answer and to sharpen our ideas and
to, yeah, uh uh maybe have better answers and
better understanding for our own position.
Mhm. So, let me ask you, because now with
the, nowadays and particularly in certain countries like the
US when people promote diversity in academia, they usually
talk about or primarily talk about A diversity in
political viewpoints or diversity in terms of political orientation.
They say, for example, that we should have more
uh right wing people in academia because there's too
many left-wing people. Well, I mean, is political orientation
also something to be considered when it comes to
cognitive diversity or not? And is political orientation really
a good enough proxy for cognitive diversity?
I think there are two debates currently happening. One
is, um, uh, there, there were these measures of,
um, uh, uh, hiring people and, and promoting people
or, or, or trying to empower people from the
underprivileged groups. And has social impact. It has a
long-lasting social impact because more, the more people who
get the opportunity to get education and the more
people who are on these higher academic positions, they
just. Just by example, are leading and are making
a change. And we have to keep in mind
that academia was closed and it's still often closed,
especially in some disciplines for specific genders already. And
just imagine other underprivileged groups. Um, uh, BECAUSE I,
I can also talk from my own experience and
I get feedback from my students who are the
3rd year students at the technical university and from
one specific group, right? They're, they're different groups. So
we are teaching. Engineers, uh, we, we're teaching philosophy
to engineers. So, so from this one group, several
people told me that I'm their, um, uh, some
said that I'm their 2nd female lecturer and others
said that I'm their 3rd female lecturer during the
3 years. Of how long they studied and that
is worrisome. And I am not even an expert
in their subjects, so I'm even teaching them philosophy.
And if you would have kind of more role
models, um, uh, female role models on these higher
positions, the, the, the, the assumption is, OK, that
will also encourage other, um, women and girls and,
and, and, and parents, because everyone has to get
motivated and believe teachers in primary schools, right? To,
to, to motivate, um, motivate them to pursue this
type of career. And there was even one research,
which I found. Very interesting, pointing out that, um,
uh, at the end, in the end of high
school, it is not the difference, um, that, that,
um, uh, between boys and girls. The point, uh,
within the natural science subjects and humanities, and they
were performing similarly well in natural sciences, it's just
that in humanities, girls were performing better. And they
use this again, so this is just the research
that was done. Um, uh, BUT I found this,
um, it was an empirical research, but I found
this, um, uh, engaging. Uh, I think Breda and
AA are the daughters of the, um, That research,
maybe we can link it later. Um, IF I'm
mistaken, please, or mispronouncing the names, please accept my
apology. Um, BUT, um, uh, I found already this
idea interesting, right? That it can be something completely,
um, uh, if you're really good in humanities, someone
tells you, OK, then you have to study humanities,
and it's not opening the option, OK, but you're
also good in natural sciences. Maybe you should, uh,
explore that. Maybe that is a nice. Career for
you. It won't be a nice career if, uh,
you enter a classroom and you are in the
minority and there are no female teachers with whom
you can connect, and that, that all adds pressure
over time. Uh, SO, so, so that, that, that
is one aspect of why, uh, we want some
type of diversity in science. Uh, uh, THIS is
a social aspect. But then we have the epistemic
aspect is, of course, the different type of, um,
uh, uh, dynamics, social dynamics, intellectual exchange, different type
of thinking will be brought. And then we have
people from uh diverse backgrounds. Um, AND again, this
might be more obvious in humanities, then I say,
OK, my positionality, where I come from, can shape
my thought, then I can think about feminist philosophy
in a certain way. And, and, of course, also
men are most welcome to enter and, and think
about feminist philosophy, and, and that, that is highly
desirable. I'm just trying to say, I, I, um,
when I say men, I mean, uh, Yeah, the
straight man, the, the, the, the paradigm, but they
are most welcome and it would be super helpful,
um, uh, and they do, and, and that is
great. Uh, AND that is this inclusive environment, so
everyone is invited. Uh, TO do it. And, and,
and that will also bring the whole field and
the whole subject. It will bring more attention to
it. Um, IT will sharpen it and it will
develop it. And that we see very strongly in
natural sciences, sorry, in social sciences, but even in
natural sciences, when you do biology, or when you
do medicine, the gender does matter. So, so, I
would definitely, um, yeah, keep that in mind. Um,
AND, and, and, and, and, and also we'll bring
different perspectives and maybe we'll also bring the idea
of which type of research to prioritize. Type of
questions are more um bothersome for, for women. And,
and, and to leave it in that way. So
I think that all matters. Uh, AND the deeper
we dive, we can realize why it matters. So
that is, that is the epistemic component why this
type of diversity would make sense. Uh, BUT when
you, when you, you ask specifically about the other
aspect, and this is this political whether we want
more right-wing, uh, people in, in science. And that
I think is a, is a great question. And
I, I like, I like this question. And, well,
let's first say that, um, contrary to popular or
to the mainstream view, I would, I would say,
yes, we do. Or at least we should be
blinded towards someone's political orientation. So we should definitely
not exclude someone. Uh, BECAUSE they are right wing.
On the, I even did the empirical research. We
last time talked about it. Um, ON the impact
of social-political attitudes, uh, on the views of scientists,
and indeed, scientists also in the research we did,
but also in other studies that we surveyed are
usually more on the left side. And um this
is some experience we are probably also noticing all
of us who work in science or everyone who
communicates with scientists and so on. Um, uh, uh,
BUT sometimes you also wonder how much people are
actually talking. Uh, BECAUSE of the social pressure and
how much silent they are, because of this microclimate
social pressure. And again, I can also say my
positionality, my positionality will be more on the left.
However, um, also maybe, again, because of my positionality,
because of everything that I experienced through my childhood
and, and, and growing up in a country that
was torn by war. Um, I, I, I have
a lot of understanding for people who come from
the right wing perspective, and they often do that
because of, uh, not all this, right? But, some,
some people do that because they, they felt that
this is what preserves their identity. This is what
preserves their life ultimately. And, uh, and, and I
would not like them to be excluded. It would
be, it is a challenge, of course, to have
the open dialogue. Um, BETWEEN the groups, but I,
I am very um sympathetic to, to, to, to
people coming from the. Um, RIGHT. Again, modules, that's
certain ways of communication, uh, human rights and so
on are, are there. And, and I think this
is really important. Um, uh, WHAT I also think
is, uh, that it, it should be welcomed, that
they express, that everyone expresses how I was feeling
now free to express my political orientation. Is that
also other people feel free to express their political
orientation? And, and not only to say this in
confidence to me because they know I'm not judgmental
person, but they're not speaking out loud, um, uh,
within larger groups because then they think they would
be stigmatized. I think that's really problematic. Number 12
is the question, how impactful is the political orientation
on someone's research and That was the, the, the,
uh, some of the findings of this paper, they
were kind of promising is that within the specific
field, uh, of research, um, people are not overly
influenced, scientists are not overly influenced by their uh
social-political orientation, which is a promising thing, but we
know historically. Um, THAT science can be really politicized
and can also be abused for different political agendas.
And that's something that we have to protect science
from, because science is probably the, I mean, it's
still highly trusted by the general population, not still,
I mean, it also makes sense that it is.
But if someone comes from the perspective of the
epistemic authority, if someone is also a lecturer at
the university and is spreading a political agenda, no
matter from which side. That is violating um people's
um rights, but it's also kind of imposing the
pressure, um, that you have to think in certain
ways, um, or, or, or installing certain values which
shouldn't. And it can also justify practices, which again,
I mean, of course, when we talk about it,
everyone thinks immediately about the Second World War period.
Um, BUT we, uh, and, and kind of how
harmful, um, uh, uh, using science for political agenda
can be. Um, BUT you should also keep in
mind that even coming from the A left wing
or it doesn't have to be left wing. It
can also be this neoliberal paradigm, which is, um,
uh, uh, yeah, advocating for freedoms, but is excluding
others, potentially, not always, of course, that, that, that,
that is also dangerous. So, so, uh, in my
opinion, I am always very careful about funding, which
has a political background. And I'm, uh, and, and
I think that all this has to be acknowledged
if you received for some type of research funding
for that comes from a political background, no matter,
uh, whether this is from the liberal part, uh,
conservative part, right, left, and so on, uh, that
we are just there, um, because funding, for instance,
um, science funding can really direct science in different
ways. And if you feel the obligation that you,
I mean, it can also be the implicit um
pressure to kind of deliver what you promised in
the grant application, uh, to deliver really, um, yeah,
if you promise that you will, um, Uh, detect
certain effects or if you promise that you will
work on, I don't know, reconciliation, which is of
course a nice idea, but then, um, uh, uh,
but then you realize that actually there are some
deeper problems where this cannot happen, and then you
might still misreport it because again of this idealistic
ideas, but maybe also because of the expectations of
the founder. And then you, it's important, right? So,
so if you work on reconciliation, which I think
is an exceptionally interesting and important topic, that, but
we have to understand the perspective of both sides.
We have to be there neutral as much as
possible, um, and then in social sciences, we know
it's not really possible to be completely neutral. That's
why we have to report our positionality. So I
would be there. I think it's a big topic.
Um, AND I would be, um. Very careful, um.
About it. And also one thing to keep in
mind, the last thing, I'm sorry, taking too much
time. Um, ALSO, a lot of our students might
be coming from different political backgrounds, and they are,
because I, I interact with them. And, and, and,
and, um, just, um, ignoring, uh, or, or denying,
or it, it is not helpful. So one has
to understand where they come from and, and we
are there to have a dialogue with them in
higher education, and also to um Acknowledge it and
acknowledge their arguments and and be there for them
and and so forth, so um. That's why I
think for someone who wants to be a proper
intellectual, um, practices of trying to, at least when
we are at workplace, to, to be neutral regarding
the political orientation is really important. Mhm.
So, what would you say are perhaps the best
ways for us to promote cognitive diversity in science
specifically? I mean, do you think that things like
just removing or trying to remove as As most
as possible, biases and barriers and obstacles, uh, uh,
would be enough for us to have more cognitive
diversity in science and then, I guess, academia more
generally, or do you think that we should, uh,
we need, uh, things or Uh, solutions that are
perhaps a little bit more interventional like affirmative action
in hiring and uh in helping certain kinds of
students attending, uh, attend the university. I mean, what
kinds of solutions do you think are best?
Mhm. I'm writing down the notes. Yes. Uh, I,
I really like, uh, one quote which says, diversity
without inclusion is an empty gesture. Mm. Um, uh,
uh, AND I think we need inclusion. Inclusion doesn't
have to only come from affirmative measures. Uh, uh,
IT'S, it can be something much simpler, what we
talked about just now, and this is to try
not to be, to try to be open to
different viewpoints, to, to consider them legitimate as much
as possible. Um, uh, TO, um, uh, uh, uh,
if we are in, in the simple example we
had from before, right, we are hiring someone who
is doing qualitative research in our highly quantitative lab.
Uh, uh, WE did that deliberately because we want
this person to bring this new, they were suspect,
and that's why we're gonna let this person do
qualitative research, and we will try to learn from
it and be open to it. Uh, OTHERWISE, if
you are just trying to uh make this person
do the same as what we are doing, which
it's highly likely that it will work, but that
doesn't bring any benefits of the epistemic diversity. Uh,
SO, so the inclusion is important and, and, and
epistemic inclusion, which means that we really then consider
these viewpoints and really try to integrate them. Uh,
WITHIN our research. And when it comes to the
affirmative actions, that, again, is a big debate because
some people feel, um, the majority group can start
feeling envy or can find it unjust. Um, AND,
and that's why we have to be careful with
affirmative actions. Uh, WHAT you asked about the education,
there I have a very leftist view. Education should
be available as much as possible to everyone, and
that everyone should be encouraged and possibly stimulated to
go to education if they have the motivation to,
to get education, if they have motivation. I think
it's also completely legitimate not to have this motivation
and just be. Happy in different ways. Um, uh,
BUT, so I wouldn't go to this perfectionism of
you, oh, you have to motivate everyone to study.
No. But for people who do want it, um,
uh, I feel that we as a society, um,
have to provide as much as possible resources that
this happens. And a lot of, actually, professors do
share this, and, and that's why professors also like
to, um, help. Give interviews as, as, as this
one, but also, uh um uh uh I'll uh
uh put their courses on some of these open
platforms and whether that will, um, Bring education closer
to everyone. I don't know, we can only hope,
but we also often give guest lectures and, and,
and, and, um, yeah, education, like, like also mentoring
when someone approaches us and so on. And, and
they do this for free, but it's, well, it's
not for free, it's for our soul because we
are happy to do it. And I think a
lot of people are actually happy to do it.
They, they see this as, uh, Uh, one of
the very important things, uh, of our job, then,
then also, uh, I think it's also nice and
and important that we are uh. Publishing, um, uh,
the ones well. People who have the opportunity to
publish open access, and I know because I also,
again, based on my positionality, I was also in
the environment in which you couldn't afford to pay
the fees to publish open access and so on.
But, and I know there are different types of
open access, uh, so some everyone doesn't have to
pay and so on. But in any case, if
you're in a privileged position that you can afford
this and that, um, Uh, both career in the
career terms and and in the financial terms, that
is also a great thing to uh make a
lot of resources available and. Uh, PEOPLE are really
doing it, and my um. Professor of logic from
Belgrade, who unfortunately passed away, but he wrote a
lovely, uh, book, uh, for high school students about
logic. And that book is freely available and, but
it's in Serbian language, but everyone can download it
and read it. And I think that's, uh, that's
something which I think he felt as one of
his legacies and. Very, very nice thing to do.
So, on the topic of cognitive diversity, is there
anything else you think is important to add or
that I might have missed in my questions, or
can we move to the philosophy of AI?
Your questions were excellent, as always. Uh, uh, YEAH,
maybe I can just shortly connect it with, um,
uh, uh, intellectual virtues. Um, BECAUSE we, we talked
a lot about the, um, uh, diversity from the
perspective of the social epistemology and, and kind of
how socially it makes sense. And we touched upon
these, these virtues of open-mindedness, of epistemic tolerance, of
intellectual justice, and, and, and, and also, uh, epistemic
charity, I would also say to all these interpret,
uh, in the most charitable way what someone is
saying. Um, uh, um, TO not care about, uh,
language fluency, but to care about the content. So
all these things are, uh, something which we can
also on the individual level practice in order to
become more, um, epistemically inclusive.
Great. So let's talk then a little bit about
uh the philosophy and ethics of artificial intelligence then.
Uh, SO you worked on a set of ethical
guidelines for development, implementation, and the use of robust
and accountable artificial intelligence adopted by the government of
Serbia. So, first of all, what are these guidelines
and why were they needed?
Um, MAYBE to make a connection between the two
topics, just to say that, um, use of AI
can potentially decrease. The epistemic diversity. And it can
decrease it in education, it could also decrease it
in science, because, uh, based on what the AI
is trained, there can be some dominant way of
thinking coming from it. And this is research that,
uh, um, my colleague, Alexandra Wolzkowitz and I did
uh regarding the, uh, use of AI in education,
uh, and, and the potential epistemic danger of the
global injustice that could also come, uh, from these
epistemic parts that there is in a dominant paradigm
that we're teaching, uh, children something which is in
the dominant paradigm and also not critically, um, uh,
assessing it enough. And we know this, um, now,
even UNESCO is pointing out that critical thinking in
the era of AI is becoming really important. And
one of the important aspects that we want to
teach everyone when it comes to the critical thinking
is exactly to question, um, uh, and to check
whether this viewpoint is fair and diverse enough. And
the fairness comes together with diversity, and that is
one of the, the principles that responsible AI has
to follow. And you asked me about, yeah, uh,
the, the, the Serbian guidelines. I was very Happy
to, to contribute to them. Um, THEY were written
before, right, before almost, the huge, uh, generative AI,
uh, expansion. But there was this visionary view that,
um, and, and like a larger strategy also, uh,
in Serbia, as everywhere else in the world, I
assume. Uh, uh, TO, um, develop, uh, um, ethically
driven AI. And it had two purposes. One is
to, um, um, uh, provide platform, uh, for people
who are developing AI to really, um, uh, there
are even forms. Uh, ATTACHED to this document, which
one can go through to check whether their AI
solution is low risk, high risk, uh, what should
change, uh, in order to make it, um, ethically
acceptable and so forth. So, it was, one was,
uh, this to, to, to really help people who
are developing it, to develop it in an ethical
way. Um, THE other one was, of course, um,
Understanding that this is a big question of the
future and that we need to align the, the
general laws which we do have about data privacy,
um, uh, um, uh, dignity, autonomy, and so on,
that we, um, align. That with the use of
new technology, because it's not always clear what is
happening in which case. And the ethical guidelines are
part of the soft law, so they're just recommendations.
Based on them later, uh, specific legal solutions and
strategies, uh, are made. Mhm.
So, I would like to, for you to tell
us a little bit about the main ethical principles
that drive the guidelines, namely, explainability and verifiability, dignity,
revision to cause damage, and fairness. So, tell us
about each of them and why these ethical principles
specifically.
Yeah, the, the, this is the, there are certain
common frameworks that we are thinking about when um
Using AI, um, uh, that what is being implemented
on, on people needs to, um, we need to
have certain control of it and, and, and to
have the understanding of it, and that we can
also, um, check and dispute what is happening, uh,
within, uh, this specific, uh, technological solution. Uh, IT
has to respect our dignity. Um, AND, uh, it
should always, like, the first thing one has to
prove is that your AI solution is actually bringing
some benefit and that it's not causing harm. Um,
THEN the fairness aspect is something which I find
Very important because what I touched just now, uh,
upon the fairness, also has the epistemic dimension. So,
it has a social dimension that someone can be
discriminated by AI, but it also has an epistemic
dimension. Let's go back again to the simplest. Example,
we use automated translation, the automated translator, uh, from
the English language in which we don't have genders.
Now it translates a text into Serbian, which is
the language which has genders, translates the doctor is
male and a nurse is female. And this is,
um, maybe it's one of the common examples. And,
uh, this, of course, um, can have certain impacts
because it is encoding, uh, stereotypes and biases, which
we are, uh, having as a society. So it
mirrors these biases, but we want that this doesn't
really happen. But it can, it can, it can
even have, um, uh, depends, depending on which uh
area we are using AI for, it can even
have bigger impact. And, um, uh, so, so, if
certain biases are there, then we can also algorithmic
biases, then it can also hinder us from learning
properly, uh, but we are getting the information which
is biased, and then we have an additional problem
is how much we trust the machines and That
is a big question, right? So, so, so, and
it's an empirical question which psychologists are trying to
study, and we often trust the machine a lot.
I know that there are conflicting viewpoints on it.
Um, BUT the machines can be very suggestive. And,
and those are, um, some of the aspects that
come with the epistemic questions. But of course, AI
can really, um, uh, have deep, profound impacts on
human life, especially if you use it. Um, IN,
uh, uh, uh, uh, in certain domains. Um, AND,
and already like if you use it to decide
who will get the credit and who will not
get the credit, and if some discrimination there is
being used, that can be really bad, um, systems
which are recommending, um, uh. Um, I mean, in
the law, there are some ideas of its application
to kind of see kind of who, who might
commit a crime again that can also be very
potentially dangerous, can have really strong effects on one's
life, or we can have some applications which are
Uh, more neutral, right? So we are just trying
to optimize, um, uh, the distribution of the gas
stations around the city or whatever, or the bus
stops or whatever. It also has some impact, but
it is less, uh, less of an impact on
humans. And what is important. Uh, WHY it's important
to have, um, some of these basic criteria, um,
uh, is because whenever we want to test a
certain AI solution, we can think about it within
these criteria. So if you're using a medical AI
we are thinking, OK, is this really helpful? Can
we really explain why this is being used, uh,
or sometimes we don't know what's actually going on,
but it's implemented on people and that is dangerous.
Is it really fair to all the patients? Um,
DO patients feel that their dignity? Uh, IS not
being respected. The similarly we are using some tool
for the use of AI in education, so we
again think through these principles and try to see
um whether they are matching. Of course, there is
the privacy. As well, and it's also mentioned in
the document. And what I think is also nice
is that these principles can be connected with certain
virtuous behaviors. So they can also be some recommendations
of how to, um, as a developer, how to
think about the solutions, whether they are satisfying them,
and as a legislator to what one should say
yes and no. And if you're having the ethical
and responsible AI, ultimately, this is also good for
the users. Because then users can trust it more.
And I think it's also good that users also
are aware of certain criteria and think about it.
OK. Is the AI really, like, is it really
explainable? Is it like, honestly made? Um, uh, uh,
uh, IS the privacy, um, is the fairness there?
The, the fairness translates to this, uh, intellectual justice,
epistemic justice, right? So are we, or justice in
general, so it has, as I said, both epistemic
and non-epistemic component. But like one can really think,
OK, but is, is, is, is this following. Um,
THIS type of virtues. And then do I want
to use it or I don't want to use
it? Do I want to give my data into
the system or not? Or even, uh, I mean,
we have to keep in mind some, some of
these solutions are suboptimal, right? So we, we will
all use translation tools or, or, or generative AI
for, um, uh, generating text, but we have to
be then there to critically think, OK. There is
this fairness question. It might, uh, misrepresent certain groups
and, uh, uh, and, and then I'm aware of
it, so I will correct for it. One example
I give to students are the photos generated by
the LE, uh, where you see kind of, um,
I, I asked it to create inclusive science. And
it gives different pictures. It's really hard to get
it as inclusive as possible with a lot of
prompting. And then even with that, you notice that
there is no older women in the picture. So
you might get, uh, different groups, but when you
intersect or, or, um, uh, uh, when you intersect,
uh, these groups, then you will, uh, you might
still have the underrepresentation. And then the idea is,
OK, you show a picture. To students and ask
them, OK, what, what is wrong on the picture?
What is missing on the picture? And if they
are aware of it, that, that is already helpful.
Because, um, yeah, that's the best we can do,
because, of course, AI is very helpful and, um,
uh, brings a lot of efficiency to us. So
sometimes it is a balancing act of trying the
optimal solution. And I think that the, the, the
ethical guidelines are exactly in this spirit. That we
wanted to uh facilitate the progress, provide some framework
for both legal but uh both legal uh solutions,
but also for the uh developers and users to
really see, um, uh, how they can do this
responsibly and what the potential consequences might be of
their solutions. I, I hope that not many people
have. Immediately evil plans, it just might go wrong.
Yeah.
So another question, what constitutes a high risks artificial
intelligence system?
Uh, THEN we are, then these systems are influencing
life of. Humans in a significant way. Uh, AND,
and, and profiling them. This is how we were
reasoning here. But we also, what I'm very proud
of, we also consider the environment, so the ecological
aspect. And we also, I think this was the
first act, uh, which actually considered the animal, uh,
welfare as well. I mean, I would even go
stronger and say animal. Right. But I mean, this
is already great. And it was, um, uh, my
humble contribution, which came, uh, from the work of
my colleague, Thio Haageendorf from Tubingen and Peter Singer.
The, the, the famous this is, uh, who were,
uh, at that time already pointing out the potential
impact of AI on animals. Uh, I think nowadays
that will become more and more standard. So we
have to take care of, um, Our planet living
beings in the planet and that AI is not
giving recommendations which can harm, uh, neither uh animals
nor environment and of course, especially humans, and we
are in the, in the document, it's, uh, the
human aspect is, of course, being, uh. Elaborated on,
and some of the cases, uh, which are the
high risk cases, not only, I, I, uh, I
mean, also in other acts that I was reading
because you have to do that to prepare and,
and it also makes sense, um, very related to
the healthcare, um, uh, education, um, because there, it
can really impact someone's life, um, very related to
the justice system, very related to something that could
potentially hinder democracy. So, also, that is, um, Um,
and, and there I would say for sure different
type of media, not only social media, but also
the standard media if, if it's, if the AI
is used too much for generating text, can become
problematic. And so those are just some illustrations, but
this list is not exhaustive, um, uh, and what
is very important is that we always have to,
uh, update. Um, SUCH lists, and then that is
written and noted in the document, and the technology
might develop in ways that we're not fully aware
yet and that's why it's important that this is.
Um, NOT fixed, but that we are constantly revising
it. And when we say that something is high
risk, doesn't always mean that it's just that it's
prohibited, right? So the use of AI in education
shouldn't just be prohibited. That's not the point. The
point is that there has to be a special
care and special attention of how it is implemented.
Mhm. So I asked you about the ethical guidelines,
but now, what does it mean for AI to
be robust and accountable? What what does that mean
exactly?
That, um, it gives, uh, uh, it gives reliable
estimates or depends what you're using it for, uh,
outputs, um, over different uses and parameters, um, uh,
that it, uh, has also this from the technical
perspective, uh, high accuracy of what it is doing,
but I think it's, um, for me, very important
that, um, To keep uh the idea of the
human in the loop, even though we are seeing
that we're going more and more in the automation
direction. But the human still, I mean, in my
opinion, has to be the one who decides about
values, who decides, um, About the quality, uh, who
guarantees for its use and implementation. So, um, I
would always, yeah, it's, it's also important and I
think this is how the legislators nowadays are thinking
that there has to always be a human responsible
for whatever he is doing because the human can
also do monitoring and updating and um. Um, I,
I, I, I, I mean, yeah, I, I definitely
think that uh human control is important.
Uh, SO, uh, I mean, my last question and
I think that you've already partly answered it in
my, in your previous answer, but what are then
the requirements for AI to be robust and accountable?
And Yeah. So, so, of course, to follow the,
the principles, which we discussed. And I would even
say these principles are not necessarily exhaustive. They're just
the main ones to, to follow the privacy, to
follow the dignity, fairness, um, explainability, um, uh, uh,
bene beneficience that it is, uh, causing no harm
and it's actually doing some good. Um, uh, THAT
is performing well, that it has, uh, I mean,
that, that is part of it, right? So, so
what we say that it's really doing good, that
it's performing well, um, on these parameters, that it's,
um, useful and um Uh, uh, again, so, so
I don't wanna finish on the note of being
too critical towards technology. On the contrary, I think
technology is great. And, uh, then we have the
trustworthy technology that can help us a lot. And
what I mean by trustworthy is that it is
also designed, uh, for humans, by humans. Um, AND,
and that is, um, this is maybe an addition
which is not in the law, but this is
what I think is, is, is very important is
that Uh, it really takes into account also the,
uh, underprivileged groups and, and, and how the underprivileged
groups might be, that's part of the fairness, of
course. But, um, um, the, in order that humans
trust. AI and the AI really has to satisfy,
uh, uh, our criteria and our demands. Also, then
we are in the underprivileged group, so that we
really feel that this is doing a good job
for us. Often we are not aware of it,
so I think it's a complex system. Where AI
is now interact with humans. And, um, there the
education plays a role that we really understand what
they, I can do, what I cannot do, at
least at the moment, how it is developing. And,
yeah, I always encourage everyone, let's, let's try to
use it. Let's, let's try to experiment with it.
Then we will also know what are the boundaries
and, and, and how we feel about it and
to maintain the critical attitude and the trust in
our own judgment.
Mhm. Great. So where can people find you when
you work on the internet?
Uh, YES, of course, on my web page, I
have a personal webpage, uh, la.com, and, um, uh,
also on my LinkedIn page, um, uh, on my,
um, university web page. Uh, MY name, my first
and last name are a unique combination. So when
you type me, you cannot miss me. OK.
Great. So thank you so much for coming on
the show again. It's always a great pleasure to
everyone.
Thank you so much, and thank you for all
these wonderful efforts and the educational material you're providing
for everyone.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullern, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs Colin Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearraujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punterrusmani
Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary Galman
Sam of Zallidriei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Francoortolotti Gabriel Ponorteseus Slelitsky,
Scott Zacharyishim Duffyani Smith Jen Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson,
Peter Vozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry
D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then
Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix,
Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van
Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas
Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers
Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.